feat: early muxer negotiation (#274)
libp2p/docs: content/concepts/multiplex/early-negotiation.md

<!-- ADD DIAGRAM -->

### ALPN extension in TLS

The [Application-Layer Protocol Negotiation (ALPN) extension](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7301) is a feature of
TLS that allows for the negotiation of application-layer protocols during the TLS handshake. This allows the client and server
to agree on the application-layer protocol for the rest of the TLS session. ALPN is typically used to negotiate the application-layer protocol
for applications that use TLS, such as HTTP/2 or QUIC. libp2p uses ALPN to negotiate the stream muxer and saves a roundtrip when
upgrading a raw connection.

### Extension registry in Noise

Since there's no commonly used extension mechanism in Noise, libp2p defines an extension registry. We then defined an extension to negotiate the stream multiplexer, that is conceptually the equivalent of the ALPN extension in TLS.

> The extension registry is modeled after
> [RFC 6066](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6066) (for TLS) and
> [RFC 9000](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc9000#section-19.21)
> (for QUIC).

More information is available in the

> [Noise specification](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/blob/master/noise/README.md#libp2p-data-in-handshake-messages).

Author: ```suggestion
[Noise specification](https://github.com/libp2p/specs/blob/master/noise/README.md#libp2p-data-in-handshake-messages).

{{< alert icon="💡" context="note" text="See the inclined muxer negotiation<a class=\"text-muted\" href=\"https://github.com/libp2p/specs/blob/master/connections/inlined-muxer-negotiation.md">specification</a> for more details." />}}
```

Reviewer: lgtm

---
title: "Early Multiplexer Negotiation"
description: "Peers can use security protocol extenstions for early muxer negotiation."
weight: 162
---

> ## Typical connection upgrade process

Reviewer 2: Or: Stream Muxer Negotiation using Multistream Select

Peers upgrade raw transport connections by using the same
[multistream-selection](https://github.com/multiformats/multistream-select)

> protocol to negotiate security and stream multiplexing.

Reviewer 2: @p-shahi's suggestion sounds good to me. The protocol is called multistream-select though.

> protocol to negotiate security and stream multiplexing.

Author: We already explain the upgrade process in the overview (https://github.com/libp2p/docs/pull/270) as part of the muxer section. So I'd suggest we improve that rather than repeating the upgrade process here.

> protocol to negotiate security and stream multiplexing.

Reviewer: My preference is to keep it here since it's a separate page.

> First, security is established, and a security handshake is performed
> either for [Noise](../secure-comm/noise) or [TLS 1.3](../secure-comm/tls).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
First, the security protocol is negotiated, then this protocol is used to perform a cryptographic handshake. libp2p currently supports [Noise](../secure-comm/noise) and [TLS 1.3](../secure-comm/tls).
```

> Multistream-select will run again on top of
> the secure channel to negotiate a steam muxer, like [yamux](yamux).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once the cryptographic handshake completes, multistream-select runs again on top of
the secured connection to negotiate a steam multiplexer, like [yamux](yamux) or [mplex](mplex).
```

> <!-- ADD DIAGRAM -->

Reviewer 2: Are we planning to merge without resolving this TODO? Should we create an issue so we don't forget?

Author: I have them noted down, and will also add to the issue open about unified diagrams.

## Early muxer negotiation

> 

Author: @p-shahi 
```suggestion

The libp2p project eliminates an unnecessary round trip in the standard negotiation protocol for selecting a stream multiplexer by combining the steps of agreeing on a secure channel and multiplexer, called "early" or "inlined" muxer negotiation.
```

> 

Author: Let's also link the spec at the bottom of the page similar to the other docs.

> 

Reviewer: lgtm but seems like a run-on sentence. I suggest splitting it up

> Early muxer negotiation is possible through the handshake of security protocols being able to negotiate higher-level
> protocols. The early negotiation takes place as a list of supported stream muxers is shared during the security protocol
> handshake, and a security protocol extension handles the stream muxer negotiation while it negotiates the secure channel
> establishment. This saves 1 RTT during the libp2p handshake and, as a result, reduces the TTFB (time to first byte).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Early muxer negotiation is possible in the handshake of the TLS and Noise security protocols because each supports sending higher-level metadata.
For libp2p's purposes this metadata is composed as a list of stream muxers protocol IDs.
This list is shared in a security protocol "extension" during the handshake. 
For a libp2p node that supports both `mplex` and `yamux`, the list will look like this:
`[ "/yamux/1.0.0", "/mplex/6.7.0", "libp2p" ]`

Sharing this list in as a part of the cryptographic handshake payload allows for stream multiplexer selection to happen simultaneously.
This saves 1 RTT during the libp2p handshake and, as a result, reduces the TTFB (time to first byte).

Currently this feature is only supported in go-libp2p and for transports that do not have native encryption or multiplexing (TCP and WebSocket).

Read below for details on how this works in TLS and Noise.
```

Reviewer 2: I like the suggestion, but we probably don't need to go into detail how the list looks like. It's different for TLS and for Noise (in Noise, we don't need the "libp2p" entry).

Reviewer: I modified it to 
>For example, if a libp2p node supports both `mplex` and `yamux`, the list it advertises in would contain both of those protocols.

Author: ```suggestion
Early muxer negotiation is a feature in libp2p that allows for the simultaneous selection of a stream multiplexer during the cryptographic handshake of the TLS and Noise security protocols. This is achieved by sharing a list of supported muxer protocols as a part of the handshake payload. 

For example, if a libp2p node supports mplex and yamux, it will advertise both in the list. This eliminates an extra round trip, improving TTFB (time to first byte) in the libp2p handshake. Currently, this feature is only supported in go-libp2p and for TCP and WebSocket transports that do not have native encryption or multiplexing.
```

Reviewer: lgtm

<!-- ADD DIAGRAM -->

### ALPN extension in TLS

The [Application-Layer Protocol Negotiation (ALPN) extension](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7301) is a feature of
TLS that allows for the negotiation of application-layer protocols during the TLS handshake. This allows the client and server
to agree on the application-layer protocol for the rest of the TLS session. ALPN is typically used to negotiate the application-layer protocol
for applications that use TLS, such as HTTP/2 or QUIC. libp2p uses ALPN to negotiate the stream muxer and saves a roundtrip when
upgrading a raw connection.

### Extension registry in Noise

> Similar to ALPN, Noise in libp2p introduces an extension registry that includes a collection of defined extensions used
> to extend the functionality of Noise. This has additional features and capabilities during the Noise handshake, including
> negotiating a stream muxer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Since there's no commonly used extension mechanism in Noise, libp2p defines an extension registry. We then defined an extension to negotiate the stream multiplexer, that is conceptually the equivalent of the ALPN extension in TLS.
```
